## The Industrial Revolution and Transportation Technology
The IR transformed the nature of the intercontinental trading system:

1. It created a massive assymetry within the world economic system where GB would embark in sustained per capita income growth (industrialization, military and political power).

2. The unprecedented shock impacted worldwide and was greatly magnified by the new technologies of the IR, especially the steam engine which integrate international commodity markets (transportation technology).

**Argument: better transportation would open national economies to international trade in ways that differed radically from what had gone before.**

Previous globalizations were geopolitical, from violence and conquests. The globalization of the 19th century was in turn largely driven by technology (however violence and conquests continued).

The transport revolutions were preceeded by the improvement of roads and surfaces years prior. People had started using canals and building steamships to navigate rivers and seas. Several innovations had allowed for bigger and lighter ships. As of late 1874, steamships carried >90% of the cotton, ginger, indigo, rapeseed, tea, cowhides and teelseed. Navigating through water was ever easier than before.

The other major development in transportation was the railroad. The growth in railway mileage was phenomenal, especially in the US where trains would play a major role in creating a national market. The decades prior to WWI saw an explosion of railway building. However, overland transport remained much more expensive than ocean transport. Yet railways and canals did more of the work in integrating global commodity markets than the steamships. There was an unprecedented, dramatic and worldwide decline in international transportation costs in the four decades leading up to WW1.

## Bulk commodities and Heckscher-Ohlin Effects
When transport costs decline, trade volumes increase (ccpp). But the transport revolutions also led to a greater variety of goods being traded and **this had profound implications for the world economy.** When intercontinental transport costs were very high, goods were expensive on destination continents before they were not produced there at all. This means that they did not displace local production because they were largely noncompeting. As late as the middle of the 18th century, a small number of commodities that were clearly noncompeting (eg. pepper, tea, coffee, etc.) accounted for more tha nhalf of European imports from the Americas and Asia. Long distance trade began to displace domestic producers in large numbers as European land became in direct competition with the land from the New World. 

When analizing the land-labor ratio in GB one can see the rising demand and price for food as it naturally occurs in a closed economy and how after 1840 the relative price of food stopped rising and eventually started to fall while the ratio of wages to land rents started to rise. This implies that **at some point, GB commodity and factor prices stopped being determined by the British endowments of land and labor and this reflects the opening up of GB's economy to long-distance trade in now competing commodities such as grain. Domestic relative prices were now increasingly determined by world market conditions rather than by domestic supply and demand.** As transportation costs fell, however, food supplies from the New World prevented GB food prices from rising further and led them to fall eventually.

But this didn't only happen in GB. Williamson (2002) presents the w/r ratio (unskilled, urban wage : returns to agricultural land).
European wages (low because no land available for workers) should have caught up with the New World wages (high because a lot of land and resources), while New World land prices (low) should have caught up with European land prices (high). This is what is supposed to happen in times of globalization and it indeed happened to many countries.

Third World countries also experienced similar trends because of commodity market integration. 

## Nineteenth century imperialism
The IR led to economic asymmetries as well as to military and political asymmetries. UK, France and Russia exploited these asymmetries to expand into Asia and Africa. Meanwhile, the US was embarking on a similar program of imperial expansion at the expense of Native Americans.

The Battle of Waterloo was fought on Sunday, 18 June 1815, near Waterloo in present-day Belgium, then part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands. A French army under the command of Napoleon Bonaparte was defeated by two of the armies of the Seventh Coalition: an Anglo-led Allied army under the command of the Duke of Wellington, and a Prussian army under the command of Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, Prince of Wahlstatt. The battle resulted in the end of Bonaparte's reign and of the First French Empire, and set a chronological milestone between serial European wars and decades of relative peace.

The Industrial Revolution was the transition to new manufacturing processes in the period from about 1760 to sometime between 1820 and 1840. This transition included going from hand production methods to machines, new chemical manufacturing and iron production processes, improved efficiency of water power, the increasing use of steam power, the development of machine tools and the rise of the factory system. Textiles were the dominant industry of the Industrial Revolution in terms of employment, value of output and capital invested; the textile industry was also the first to use modern production methods.[1] The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain and most of the important technological innovations were British.

A gold standard is a monetary system in which the standard economic unit of account is based on a fixed quantity of gold. Most nations abandoned the gold standard as the basis of their monetary systems at some point in the 20th century, although many hold substantial gold reserves.

A commodity market is a market that trades in primary economic sector rather than manufactured products. Soft commodities are agricultural products such as wheat, coffee, cocoa and sugar. Hard commodities are mined, such as gold and oil.

If the GB markets had not opened, it would have been less attractive to invest in railways and frontier extension. Frontier economies would have grown slower (can't borrow from GB!) and pulled in less European immigrants. If the frontier had not expanded, then European grain prices would have been higher, meaning European workers have to pay more for food and the working class would have grown less rapidly than it did. So it's basically all because of commodity market integration through a type of globalization proposed by GB opening up the trade routes.

The divergence of income in the New World was not due to Third World impoverishment but to the very rapid income growth in Europe, North America and Australasia (the effect is more relevant).

## Conclusion
Before the 19th century, intercontinental trade was small and limited to noncompeting goods because of high transport costs, trade restrictions and war. After Waterloo, where Napeleon is defeated, came the IR which started in GB. It changed the living standards and made GB the most prosperous country in the world. It also made goods competing because they could be in one place or another rather quickly. It led to a demise of traditional industry in much of Asia because of greater competitiveness of Western industry and transport revolutions which destroyed the natural protection of distance. **It would have taken a massive increase in tariffs or prohibitions to counteract the effects of steamships, railroads, the Suez Canal, etc**. The technological and economic forces were so powerful that even resource-abundant countries now had tariff autonomies such as Latin America. Later in this period, governments in the Americas were imposing heavy tariffs not just for revenue but to promote industrialization. The situation was not sustainable as industrialization started appearing everywhere and GB couldn't do anything about losing its competitive advantage. **The backlash was an important feature of the late 19th century**.

The late 19th century governments sort of managed the political challenges posed by globalization, defusing protectionist demands through domestic legistlation or giving in to them. The bottom  line is that world trade grew rapidly during the 19th century, commodity market integration deepened despite rising tariffs and it started to grow slower after 1914 because of diminishing returns and uncontrollable industrialization around the world.