# New Deal
A series of social liberal programs enacted in the United States between 1933 and 1938. They included both laws passed by Congress as well as presidential executive orders during the first term (1933–1937) of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The programs were in response to the Great Depression, and focused on what historians refer to as the "3 Rs," Relief, Recovery, and Reform: relief for the unemployed and poor, recovery of the economy to normal levels, and reform of the financial system to prevent a repeat depression.

# Great Depression
A severe worldwide economic depression that took place during the 1930s. The timing of the Great Depression varied across nations; however, in most countries it started in 1929 and lasted until the late 1930s.

# Socialism
A range of economic and social systems characterised by social ownership and democratic control of the means of production; as well as the political ideologies, theories, and movements that aim at their establishment. German socialism emphasized military and investment spending over consumption. The result was lower unemployment and lower wages. This was done through government policies rather than by efficiency wage setting like in the US. 

The American recovery under the New Deal was similar to German expansion: German recovery emphasized consumption at first, then reversed and emphaszed investment instead. The American recovery started with investment and then went on to emphasize consumption. 

The author uses 3 features to describe socialism:

1. Public ownership or regulation of utilities and banking
2. Heavy government involvement in wage determination
3. A welfare state providing everyone with a social dividend derived from the natural resources owned by society.

# Keynesian
The various theories about how in the short run, and especially during recessions, economic output is strongly influenced by aggregate demand (total spending in the economy). In the Keynesian view, aggregate demand does not necessarily equal the productive capacity of the economy; instead, it is influenced by a host of factors and sometimes behaves erratically, affecting production, employment, and inflation.

# Reaganomic
The economic policies promoted by U.S. President Ronald Reagan during the 1980s. These policies are commonly associated with supply-side economics, referred to as trickle-down economics or voodoo economics by political opponents, and free-market economics by political advocates. The four pillars of Reagan's economic policy were to reduce the growth of government spending, reduce the federal income tax and capital gains tax, reduce government regulation, and tighten the money supply in order to reduce inflation.

# Efficiency wages
Wages above the market wage designed to elicit greater effort from worker. The higher pay encourages productivity, giving rise to higher-quality efforts. 

# Nazi Four Year Plan
A series of economic measures initiated by Adolf Hitler to provide for the rearmament of Germany, and to prepare the country for self-sufficiency in four years, from 1936–1940. Aside from emphasizing the re-building of the nation's military defenses, in disregard of the restrictions imposed on Germany by the Treaty of Versailles after the German defeat in World War I, the Four Year Plan sought to reduce unemployment; increase synthetic fibre production; undertake public works projects; increase automobile production; initiate numerous building and architectural projects; and further develop the Autobahn system.
